Martin Gray has seen more magical places on earth
than perhaps any other human being.
The wonderful part is that,
as a passionate scholar, researcher and traveler,
he has made it his life's work to
bring these places to you via his phenomenal website;
SacredSites.com.
And, while his work can bring a bit of the magic to you
via your laptop,
his real joy is to inspire others to
make their own pilgrimages to
these sacred and holy sites around the globe;
including some of the more commonly known destinations;
such as the Great Pyramid.
Martin, you're known for your studies of ancient sites.
But, the truth is the only reason
you've been able to study in such depth is because
you have gone into so many disciplines
that it's mind-boggling.
Archaeology, Astrophysics, Astronomy,
Paleontology, all of it.
You've kind of gone Anthropology.
You've gone there so you know your stuff.
So, I'm just telling people that in advance;
to listen up here.
And, the thing I don't know about you yet,
even though I do know you,
is I don't know how this all began.
Well, one thing I'd like to give a little clarification;
yes, I have a sort of secondary specialty in ancient sites.
But, really what my specialty is sacred sites,
pilgrimage shrines, holy places;
a lot of which were very ancient or
were known and used in ancient times.
And, thereby, I've been to them.
And, kind of how I got into this
is my father was a diplomat.
And, he traveled around the world.
And, his hobbies were archaeology and photography.
And, my mother was sort of a pseudo art historian.
So, I was brought up in art museums,
looking at great art; paintings.
And being influenced by the composition of the paintings.
And, my father's going off to archaeology sites,
taking pictures with cameras.
And, I'm a little three, four, five, six,
eight, nine, twelve year old kid.
I lived in India from 12 to 16.
And so, I'm going to these sacred places.
A lot of times, the greatest architecture of antiquity
are ceremonial places;
not the living structures of the people,
not even the living structures of the nobility;
the aristocracy, but
the actual religious structures of the people.
And so, we're going.
My father's photographing them.
My mother's commenting on them in an artistic sense.
And, I fell in love with archaeology when
I was, I think, seven years old.
Okay.
Well, that's a good place to begin.
What a privileged childhood you had in that sense,
just amazing.
So, you've had also some mystical visions?
You've had experiences that have
taken you deeper into the subject too.
Is that something you'd like to comment on
at this point before we go along this path?
Yes.
It began when I was six and a half, seven years old.
And, I'd known that it was happening.
But, I didn't know what it was.
And, I didn't have anybody that I could talk about it.
So, I didn't really have a sort of
intellectual understanding of it.
But, one day I'm at a party;
or my parents have had a cocktail party at the house.
There were some other military attaches and
pilots and diplomats there.
And, my parents bring my sister and I out to
parade us before they put us to bed.
And then, one of these colonels or something
asked me, thinking I'm going to say
I want to be an air force pilot like my father,
he says "What do you want to be when you grow up?"
And, I said I wanted to be a philosopher.
And, all these people stopped.
And, they thought "What's a six year old kid
"or seven year old kid saying that?"
And, it was the closest word I had.
Seven year olds don't have that many
words in their language, their available vocabulary.
It was the closest word I had
that sort of approximated these visions
of myself that I had seen when I got to be older;
that when I got to be older, I was saying something,
doing something that, at that point in my life,
I thought "Well, maybe it's a philosopher."
Now, I know it's that and more.
But, it was at that time.
And then, there were a number of different
phases in my life.
When I was 12, 13 in India,
very, very strong experiences of these.
Then, when I was 19 and 20
and I was living in a Hindu monastery,
very strong experiences.
And then, when I was about 28, 29,
I began having these experiences again;
these visionary experiences.
These are not intuitions.
People say "Oh, I had an intuition.
"Go over to Wisconsin and see my grandmother."
I'm not talking about that.
I'm seeing full fledged color cinematographic
experiences in my head.
And, I after I got good at receiving them--
Would you say maybe "remembrances"
might be a good word?
Remembrances, but lots of it future;
lot's of it future positioned,
indicating something that I could,
never should, but could do in the future.
And, one of the ones, when I was about 28, 29,
this information began communicating.
Follow the pilgrimage routes of
the ancient religions.
I owned a couple of travel agencies at that point.
I had a good bit of money.
I was a hardcore bike racer.
And I thought "Well, I'm just gonna get a mountain bike
"and ride around the world
"and visit sacred sites--"
Sure, why not?
"And take pictures."
So now, 22 years later,
123 countries--
123?
123 countries, added it up the other day,
about 40 by bicycle.
And we're not talking about
just like passing through Luxembourg?
No, no.
It's extremely extensive.
I have all these points on a map.
And, people say "Well, how do you do it?"
And, I go "I come in at the north,
"south, east or west and generally
"go to the other direction."
I never make reservations.
I never, ever, ever make reservations
except for the plane over.
Never make reservations for hotels.
Just dive in.
And, a lot of the places that I go,
there ain't no fancy hotels.
And, I don't want to stay with rich Americans and Europeans.
I want to be with the locals.
I want to be with the people;
the pilgrims at ground level.
And, this is why I say even though I don't have
one of those, to me, rather silly
degrees from a University saying he's a PhD in Anthropology.
Because, what anthropology is really about
is field research.
So, in the Sacred Site studies,
I've got as much field research as,
the top guys in the world say
as any living human being.
You know, it's a 1,200 sacred sites--
Yeah, you've done the work.
You've been there, you've put your life there.
As a pilgrim.
With the pilgrims.
Sleeping on the ground with them,
on the cots with them,
just doing everything with the local pilgrims.
In fact, speaking of that,
I'm going to jot down a little note here.
Because, I want to talk about this year in Mecca.
Because, you were there.
And, with everything going on,
we're gonna get around to that.
That's a little more current.
But, I wanted to ask you;
now start going into another area.
And, that is
some of the dynamics or energetics that
actually makes these places sacred,
which I don't know how many of our viewers
do understand that, just like our bodies
have meridians; energetic meridians,
so does the planet.
Can you talk about the notion of ley lines
and magnetism and energetics
and what happens in these places?
Ok, yes I can.
Very well.
So, what I'd say is
let us call that the phenomenology of the miraculous.
What is it that causes these particular places on the planet
to have a range of effects
on a variety of different types of people?
And, first of all, there's this separation;
so important between Yin and Yang;
masculine and feminine,
both in the people that are going
and in the quality of the site.
Not all sites are Yin or Yang.
Certainly not all sites are dedicated to the gods.
The reason the were dedicated to the gods in antiquity
is they were Yang points;
not because patriarchal cultures took over the Yin sites.
But they are a collection of types of
power places on the planet.
They only became sacred sites later
when they get invested in sanctity by tradition.
But initially, they're just these places
with a variety of different fields, qualities,
luminosities, characteristics, we can't even really say
it's not one thing, exactly what it is,
but in my extensive travels around the world
and super comprehensive research on this subject,
I've actually delineated 32 different categories
of power places or sacred sites.
32 different types,
being like a sacred mountain,
a holy well, a place with a Marian apparition,
a place with a saint lived,
a place, there's a lot of different types of these,
okay, but then I began thinking, okay,
what is the cause of the power, of the quality,
of the luminosity, of that,
whatever it is that human beings experience.
What is the cause of that?
And after, again, a lot of study
and a lot of personal experience,
I've actually delineated 20 distinct factors
that contribute to the power of place.
And I've put them in three different categories.
One, it's the power of the Earth itself.
And what determines the power of the Earth
itself in that spot?
That I'll talk to you about.
The first three, the power of the Earth,
then the power of the structures
that are built at them with the sacred geometry
according to the sacred geography.
According to different astral or celestial alignments.
And then third is the power of human attention,
which is really a wonderful thing.
So the first one is the power of the Earth.
Well, there are a number of different places
upon this planet that have
different electromagnetic frequencies.
Different gravitational frequencies,
and it's a big study
and I could really go into detail on that,
but I won't right here.
Only because we don't have
the next eight hours here today,
but we could--
They're all monitorable,
they're all measurable,
now people in antiquity didn't have the types
of instruments as far as we knew,
that measured them, had a little scope
with a needle saying,
oh it's 32-7 or 48 whatever,
but they felt something.
And the shamans of the tribes
and the leaders, the elders,
the visionars and--
Yeah, they felt something.
And those somethings are,
we can record nowadays with modern instruments.
But there's something there.
It's too simplistic to say,
"Oh, well, they're just all on ley lines."
And the word ley line is actually a Roman word
that means commercial track line,
and Alfred Watkins, in 1921,
who came out with this book,
The Old Straight Track,
he had this idea.
He was an antiquarian,
not an archaeologist,
and he traveled around England in his spare time,
photographing pre-reformation pilgrimage cathedrals
and neolithic sites and marking them on maps.
One day he looked at them,
and he went, "Gosh, you could draw straight lines
"between these."
And now we know that there actually are
physical remains between the different neolithic sites.
Interesting thing is the lines predate
the neolithic sites on them.
The lines predate it.
This is very interesting.
And the lines are representations of something that,
and we find them all over the world.
No connections between them,
no connections between them,
and it's sent all over the world.
The stuff that's happening in Asia,
is not connected with the stuff in Europe
in a sense of a traceable line,
but it's mathematics is.
So there are various grid systems on this planet.
Grid systems.
And that gets more complex.
The grid systems are composed of sub grids,
and some of those sub grids,
Alfred Watkins even stopped calling them ley lines,
he said, just old straight tracks,
that's at the end of the light--
Old straight tracks.
He only called them old straight tracks.
So the notion of ley lines is actually a misnomer.
Let me ask you a question in this.
When you're talking about the grids,
can it be as simplified as within a particular area,
almost laid out like longitude and latitude.
Is it that simple?
No, it's much more complex.
But I mean in terms,
but more local to the area,
or is it something that continues globally?
It's globally and
the way I had some visionary experiences one time
in a monastery called Hilandari
in Mount Othos in Northeastern Greece
in 1983.
And I've been in this church
chanting with these Greek orthodox monks,
and then I came out and it was like two AM
in the morning and I'm out in this old
11th century courtyard,
and I sit to meditate and I see
this picture, there was a sphere
that represented the Earth and inside it
was a sort of mixture of all the platonic solids.
And where the vertex points of the platonic solids,
hit the inside of the sphere of the surface of it,
the surface of the sphere,
determined where there were different points
of a certain type
on the planet.
Then there were long, rhythmic spirals
coming out of them going clockwise
or counter-clockwise,
and where those long rhythmic spiral lines
intersected with the straight lines coming
from this grid structure inside this,
determined even more points.
The different structures inside were sub grids
of the major grid,
and the different sub grids
had a particular energetic quality.
Which gave rise to, if you have a sacred site in Argentina,
and one in Afghanistan,
no cultural connection,
no chronological connection,
same founding legend, how is that?
Human beings had an experience
the same elemental energies of the Earth,
and they're on the same sort of grid,
same sort of lines,
same sort of something.
That's what gave rise to a similarity of founding legend.
All these places together constituted,
whoa, 100's of sites on the planet.
But then there's others too.
There's other types, too.
There's that, I think there's a mathematical certainty
to some of them,
and Graham Hancock,
who I know you've interviewed here before,
his book Heaven's Mirror is very, very good.
It's fabulous.
Very, very good about this.
Now we have more information.
But it's very, very good,
there is something coming out now,
more and more understanding of this.
Well, it sounds like we're not going
to be able to get past the scratching of the surface,
but that gives us an idea that there are these spots
with many factors.
Yeah, yeah.
A grid that has the matrices of which
is made up, it sounds like,
of many different frequencies.
Right, and then one thing about it,
the third thing, and then we'll get to the second in a bit,
but the third thing of the intention,
Sedona's a primary example.
I was just going to ask you that.
There is no evidence whatsoever,
archaeologically or historically,
that Sedona was a sacred site to the Indians
in archaic times and they aren't even very old around here.
Hohokam and Sinagua, it's just a pass by place.
And there was some farming activity
that happened in Old Creek because it's,
you know, it's wet down there,
and some things can grow,
but this was not a holy place.
And even the Yavapai-Apache and their place
out in their enchantment,
it's not old,
they're 13th, 14th century,
they're not old.
And meant to me, 10th century,
fourth century, it's not old,
so this place was never a holy place.
There are no vortexes here.
There are none whatsoever and I can give you the history
of how that notion of vortexes came out with
Paige Brian, back in the late eight,
or in the 80's,
but there are no vortexes.
What there is, is there's ferous oxide here,
which rusts and gives the rocks its redness.
But the main thing about this place
is by popular imagination,
it's become sort of a mecca of the American
and the European and the Japanese new age community.
So people are coming here,
people are coming here,
and there is a deposition of (inaudible),
of energy and it's carried by the intention.
Just as film can record in a 250th of a second,
can record something,
like on my photographs,
I just point this black box at something
and I press a button.
Shutter goes across the film,
the film remembers what it sees.
Right.
Magnetic tape in a tape recorder,
you speak and then it remembers it.
So you have a much bigger piece of earth,
much longer, tens of 1,000's of people coming
with hope in their heart,
with a feeling of a mystical quest.
And it works.
And it works,
they charge it with a power,
and then the power attracts others.
And they come and they charge it.
So there's some sort of gratitude feedback loop
that builds and builds and builds.
That's why it's so important to come to Sedona.
It definitely has a power.
But forget these silly vortexes.
Forget them.
Anywhere you go it has it.
The magic is happening.
The magic is all over the place.
Yes it is.
So let's talk about some of the other sites,
and no first of all, let's talk about number two,
did we get to number two?
No saying.
Well, let's see, one, two,
what, we talked about number one,
and we talked about number three.
Oh, number two?
There's a lot of different factors
that go into that particular major subcategory,
and I think the sacred geometry and sacred geography
are really important.
Sacred geography is the placement of these
these shrines, these temples, these mosques,
pyramids, whatever you wanna call them,
on what appears to be a global grid.
And some of it is oriented terrestrially,
and some of it is definitely, definitely oriented,
extra-terrestrially, celestially,
different sites have sort of alignments
with the sun, the moon, the stars,
and the planets, and then you got
the procession of the equinoxes,
the minor lunar standstill,
and all these different complex things.
It gets more complex but there's that thing.
But sacred geometry which means what is really,
really fascinating in this regard.
And people go what is sacred geometry?
And I go it's just mathematics of nature.
And it's the mathematics of music.
The different musical tones and the different frequencies
of the colors, it's all according to mathematics.
And people in antiquity, they just looked at nature,
everywhere in front of you,
and then go oh, well, there's this,
what they later came to call the Fibonacci series,
there's this replicating mathematical constants.
So people saw them
and then they began to put them in their own
two dimensional art and three dimensional architecture.
And it's the same thing as making a guitar
or a flute,
it's just sacred mathematics.
Incredible mathematics that creates these
harmonic energy chambers,
so that when you go into a pyramid or a mosque
or a church or a temple,
whatever it is, a lot of these buildings are built
with that mathematics and they just
gather, concentrate, and radiate into a specific place
the powers that are contained there.
Such as the pyramids.
Yes, such as the pyramids.
Why don't we start there?
That's a good place to begin.
Well, there's the thing,
you always gotta look at there's this bifurcation,
there's the Great Pyramid and there's
you know, the Osiron, the Sphinx temple,
and the Valley temple and the Sphinx
and the Reds Pyramid and a few other things.
And then there's what is called old,
middle, and new kingdom Egypt.
It's nice stuff, it's very, very advanced.
It's wonderful and interestingly enough
it's most advanced at its very beginning,
but then we have something before
the Great Pyramid.
Now, there's no evidence whatsoever
that the Egyptians built the pyramid,
and this is something I can go into for six to eight hours
no problem, but the Great Pyramid
there is absolutely no kings and queens chamber in it.
That's a notion that some archaeologist,
a European archaeologist later named,
they gave the biggest room to the guy
and the smaller room to the girl,
it's a stupid, idiotic idea.
There was never a burial in it,
or any Egyptian pyramid.
But there was something.
Oh there was something inside of this big room,
the main room.
Can you talk,
do you care to talk about that
for just a little--
Yeah.
Without getting too sidetracked
into ancient Egyptology.
There's, inside of the main room,
which itself has tremendous, tremendous mathematics.
Mathematics that are so sophisticated,
we didn't again, figure them out in Europe,
until let's say 1780.
And the Greeks got everything they had
in a sense of mathematical wisdom,
from the Egyptians.
The Great Pyramid, and especially the room inside
is of such extraordinary mathematics,
we don't know how they made that big granite coffer,
we don't, because they didn't have any metal carving tools,
but if you look at it really close you see these
big circular sort of marks on it,
like it was done with this big drill,
and we don't know how that was made.
And it didn't even,
it's not even positioned in a place
of good direction it used to be positioned.
Because there was a thing that used to happen
when, the box isn't where it used to be.
The box was in another position.
Because when people went in there and they got in the box,
especially at certain time periods,
and they got in the box and their head
was in a certain position,
relative to the box, relative to the chamber,
relative to the pyramid,
vectoring in certain energies from below and above,
it brings a certain energy to that box,
to a person's head,
that caused three things.
Either flashes of enlightenment,
flashes of and sometimes permanent insanity,
or the disappearance of a person's body,
and they are finding them in the chamber
way, way down at the bottom of the pyramid later.
Now how do you explain that?
So what they did is they moved the box
so those things didn't happen.
And Napoleon, he even reports it.
Because he was in there one night,
and he said later, he wouldn't tell anybody what happened,
but he said it was the most frightening
evening of his entire life.
I know that some of this,
and you used a lot of different sources,
but you and I are both fans of Tony Bushby's work,
and I hope to interview him one day.
And some of this from the book The Secret in the Bible.
And which goes right back into the most ancient times
in Egypt which you are speaking of.
And there are so many areas of this I find fascinating
because then you're getting into some of the
greatest mysteries on Earth, really,
isn't that what you're talking about?
And isn't that really what people are somehow remembering
or being drawn to when they go
to the Great Pyramids?
So tell-
Being drawn to, yes, yes.
Being drawn to, yes.
Without even knowing it,
you see there's a spiritual magnetism to these places.
Think of a spiritual magnetism,
there's actually qualities of these places,
energetic qualities that resonate with different
parts of our, let's say soul nature,
that reach out and pull on us,
and infiltrate our dreams and our thoughts
and our visions such that we wanna go there.
That's one of the functions in these places,
and how they work.
So if a person were to go there today,
if you were going to guide them as to
going into, quote, the King's Chamber, today,
what would you have them be alert for
or have the true knowledge of
what that experience could impart to them?
As I often say to people,
I think a parallel journey through the archaeology
and mythology of a culture,
before you go,
is going to sort of predispose you
to an even deeper experience.
I think it's really neat to know some of that,
but I'm a scholar and I like that stuff,
and I read thousands of books, literally.
But if you don't wanna do all that
and you're just gonna go,
just go and be, that's it,
when you put a tea bag in water
does the tea bag have to think
I'm gonna be red zinger or mint,
no it just steeps into the water.
And the power of these places
just steeps into your heart and soul and mind.
All you have to do is go and be.
Show up.
That's it, just go and be.
Nothing more.
If you wanna chant a mantra or carry some quartz crystals
or wave a rattler, do something with sage,
you can do it, you don't need to do it,
that's cute, that's all it is, it's cute.
You don't need to do any of it,
it's so simple.
Like when you plug electrical appliance into the wall,
do you gotta stand around and know physics?
No, you just plug it in and it works.
Same thing with us,
we go to these places, that's enough.
And the truth is, we're being affected
on subtle levels,
we're not even aware of,
so to think that you went in and you come out
of one of these sites,
and you don't have a major vision,
that nothing happened is untrue.
I think that that's a really important point to get across.
It doesn't mean nothing has happened.
Right, and two things there that brings up,
my mind, is one thing is,
actually too much ceremony,
often times, gets in the way of something happening.
Because people go oh, I know what to do here.
No, no, no, no.
That place is older than you,
that place is bigger than you,
have some humility.
Just go in and be empty, be free.
The second thing is seeds are sown.
You don't get a full grown tree or a rosebush
in one day, no, no, no.
A seed is sown.
And it grows and maybe it will sprout
and bear fruit,
in ways that are unexpected for you
and you might even miss them later on.
Let's talk about some of the other places,
let's move out of Egypt for a bit,
and take a little,
a little globe plot trotting tour,
and we're gonna be showing these visuals
at the same time.
What are some of the most profound sites
in terms of their mystical emanation that you have visited?
And if you can speak a little bit about each one.
Okay, well then, emanation and then
a qualification on emanation is mystical emanation.
Mystical emanation, right.
Not all power places are mystical.
Some power places are healing sites,
and there's a specific quality there,
that may affect women or men,
may affect the kidneys, may affect the eyes,
may affect the skin.
Let's talk about some of that,
give some prime examples.
That's really useful information.
Oh, gosh, well, there's--
Let's start with a masculine place
that might heal for the masculine.
Let's start with a feminine place.
Okay, well then, heal for the masculine,
heal for the masculine in the archetype
or the psychology of the masculine
or the actual physical ailment, see,
there's differences there.
No, it's okay, let's do one of each.
One for the archetypal energy, one for the healing energy
for the masculine.
We'll do the same for the feminine.
Okay, well, what comes to my mind for an archetype
of the masculine,
and even though there are three reputed locations
of Sinai that I, actually at this point,
accept the Mount Sinai that is in a certain part of Egypt.
This place has a tremendous, it has a value--
Does that mean Mount Horeb
or Mount Sinai, literally, okay.
Yeah, Mount Sinai in Egypt,
I'll give you a great picture of it from my website.
National Geographic used that in it's recent book,
by the way.
Okay.
That place though, is beneficial for women to go to.
It's especially beneficial for men to go to.
Not because of Christianity or Judaism,
those are recent historical overlays
on something that's far beyond them in time.
There's something at that place
that for young men to go to,
it assists them, really what it does,
is it's a sort of rite of passage place,
it's a place that if you go there,
there's these certain sort of stages
that we as men and women go through in our lives,
and we can sort of get a little bit of assistance
in transiting difficult times.
And Mount Sinai definitely has that quality for young,
middle aged, and old aged men.
Really, really does.
What about for healing for men?
Well, again--
We're, I know this is crass because
we're having to make it really base and simple.
And they have to go to your site and study your work
and they'll get more,
but I would love for us all to know,
just a little thumb nail sketch of something.
Okay, well there's a place in,
it's always important to look up what is the gender,
what is the sex of the primary deity of the shrine?
And throw out that rubbish,
that feminist rubbish, that all goddess,
their all goddess sites,
it's Mother Earth, it's not Mother Earth,
it's an androgynous being.
It's both.
But for the gender of the primary deity,
there's a place in Mexico called Izamal.
Beautiful picture.
How do you spell that?
I-Z-A-M-A-L.
Izamal, in Yucatn, near Mrida.
And there is a shrine there,
this beautiful pyramid, it's now torn down,
the Spaniards tore it down in like 1525.
And then they built this monastery
and they put in a statue of Mary,
and there's all these miracles of healing attributed to Mary
but if we do a little bit of research into the Mayans,
we find out, oh, this was a healing site for a Mayan deity
named Itzamna.
And Itzamana was a god of healing.
So what this means is it's a yang point,
primarily for men, beneficial for men,
and it's a healing site.
Now we don't know exactly what the particular ailments were
that Itzamana seemed to be beneficial for.
But he's a primary deity so chances are
it was a lot of them.
So there you have--
An example of male rites of passage
and also male healing.
Right.
And so then if you go to Ireland
and you find all these shrines,
these healing springs,
they're not dedicated to Mary,
they're usually dedicated to Brigid.
Saint Brigid.
Well, there was these goddess prior to the arrival
of Christianity and basically around the first century
second century AD,
there was this goddess there of healing.
And you find her at a lot of these shrines
and the forest glades in Ireland,
I've been to about 50 of them, I love them very much,
they're such magical places.
You go there, you feel like,
ooh, I'm back in the 11th century.
It's wonderful.
Are there some names of any of it,
and places, locations?
Yeah, they're listed on my website.
They're listed on your website?
The healing shrines of Ireland.
Okay, so these are healing shrines
for the female, for the feminine?
Right.
And you would ask one of mystical power.
Yes, and now mystical power from them.
Okay, so what I would qualify those as,
is places where people have had these experiences,
that our languages give words to like,
satori, nirvana, moksha,
(inaudible), illumination, awakening,
all of these things, okay.
Shambhala is a place, Shamabhala is not an experience.
It represents the experience.
I'm using it like magical.
Places that, for a variety of reasons,
have given rise to human beings have those experience
that they later talk about them with those words.
Satori is not satori, satori is a word.
You read the word satori, you don't get the experience.
Okay, but there are places that have a quality
that either catalyzes an awakening of consciousness,
or further amplifies that which is already there.
So these are places where you can plug in,
why did Buddha go to where he went, the Bodhi tree?
We not only have the Buddah say oh,
it's where the Buddha of the three previous ages also
attained enlightenment,
but numerous sages had already gone there.
You go to Bodh Gaya in India,
where the Bodhi tree is,
you go to a place another great photograph of mine,
a Jain sacred site in Ghughra, India,
called Shatrunjay .
In Jainism there are what are called 14 tirthankaras,
these realized beings.
11 of them attained realization on that mountain.
What is the name of the mountain again?
Shatrunjay.
I could spell it, but Shatrunjay.
There's a legend, there's a myth,
that 11 people obtained spiritual awakening at this place.
If you're traveling in India,
wouldn't it make sense to go over there
for a few minutes,
by the way it's the most beautiful temple complex
in all of Western India,
so you're gonna see great art,
monumental architecture.
And I see you have great photographs
of this we're showing, right?
Yes, so why not go?
And if there's a possibility that I might get
some clearer knowledge about my soul and life,
what's wrong with that?
That's what these mystical places are.
And every single religion, major religious figure
founder on this planet,
I can trace their awakening and enlightening experiences
to sites.
Okay, let's do it.
They're place specific, they're place specific.
Let's do it, give me a couple.
Well, the four major,
four major holy places in the life of that guy, Jesus?
they're all caves, and they're all known as sacred sites,
long before he was born.
I gotta ask you a question, right here and now
about that.
I had, probably the most, profound single experience
of my life in (inaudible) at the cave,
where the monastery to John the Baptist is now,
above the well.
What's up with that?
And did that have anything to do with this?
Same thing, same thing.
Known long before he was around.
Bushby, Tony Bushby by the way,
Secret of the Bible and The Bible Code,
ooh, lots of really good information on John the Baptist.
If people would read it and go whoa,
I didn't know that.
Well, I'm sure because I haven't read
the previous one, I'll be included in that group,
but I can tell you that that's, that space,
that cave, is unlike anything I've ever experienced.
So let's talk about where a few of the places
that Jesus attained enlightenment,
within the area?
According, there's no evidence in the New Testament
whatsoever that he was born on Christmas Day.
The Romans took over that.
We get that, that's a lot of Pagan stuff.
You know, winter solstice and all that,
so according to some myths, some legends,
he was born in this cave, in Bethlehem.
Okay.
Okay, so you can go into that cave.
You'll find these four pictures on my website.
You can go into that cave.
Then, when he's a young boy,
Mary has a vision that he's in danger,
so they flee to Egypt for two years and six months,
and they stay in another cave in a place called
Del Muharraq.
And then when he's a younger man,
he has the temptation,
the period of the temptation,
so he spends 40 days in a cave,
above the old city of Jericho,
it's called (inaudible).
And then where the resurrection occurred,
the tomb of the holy sepulcher.
Right.
Beautiful place.
In Jerusalem, so these four caves,
all caves, all caves,
all sacred places known,
1,000 years before Mary or Jesus ever heard of.
Can you talk about this,
because I do understand this,
both intuitively and there's some empirical sense,
there's something about caves placed in these areas,
there's something about the energy of caves
that cannot be duplicated in any other way,
except the emanation of those fields.
Can you talk about what's happening
in these cave areas?
Well, one thing you can,
it's really helpful to talk about,
in a sense of sacred sites and power places,
is this notion of portals and interdimensionality.
That what you see is not the only thing that's there.
Right.
There's other dimensions,
and there are dimensional sort of access points
that are portals.
And so you're at one of these things,
it's not like oh, the space opens up
and I walk back into the 11th century, no,
you're staying in the 20th century,
but there's an energetic portal
where you're having access to another dimension
at the same time.
And caves are tremendous energetic portals
that funnel, first of all, gather,
concentrate, and then funnel or radiate
into that space.
Ooh, super terrestrial energy.
Unbelievable.
I mean, I won't even go into it,
but it's just mind blowing.
Many, many of the sacred caves in antiquity
are dedicated to goddesses more than gods.
A lot of yang deities are dedicated to the mountains.
And it's not again, because the men
took over the feminine sites.
No, I mean, energetically, it makes sense.
A gathering of energy versus a projection of energy,
it makes perfect, logical sense.
Sometimes though, you do find,
yin sacred mountain and yang cave.
Which is really interesting.
So we've got Jesus in those four sites,
now what about Buddha?
Well, Buddha, you know, like,
oh, I have a great essay on the sacred sites of Buddhism
on my website, like 10 pages long,
really nice, juicy information.
But there were initially four sacred places in Buddhism.
Where he was born, Lumbini.
Where he attained enlightenment, Bodh Gaya.
Where he gave his first sermon, Sarnath.
And where he died, Kushinagar.
But then, when he died, his relics were gathered
and they were put in eight different places.
And then these relics were further divided
and put in many, many other different places
around India and around Asia.
A lot of the relics weren't actually the relics of Buddha.
But this horde of relics started spreading
and then these became Buddha's sacred sites,
but the initial four were the ones that I named.
Okay, that's--
Then again, well especially Bodh Gaya and Sarnath,
they were already known as holy places.
Lumbini and Kushinagar were not.
They're specific to Buddha.
Let's go to Muhammad.
Well, I was just, I just had the wonderful opportunity
just a few months ago.
You were there at the same time.
And in January I was in Saudi Arabia
at, doing the Hajj Pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina,
to Mecca.
And let's talk about Mecca and Medina,
I really wanna know more about those.
Well one thing I have to say is,
I have been doing a really, again,
good, solid anthropology from the inside.
Field research of Islam,
study of Islam for the last 10 years.
I actually did the conversion process to Islam
in Morocco 10 years ago and then have,
as a result, done every major pilgrimage shrine
from Indonesia to French West Africa.
All of Islam, and Islam, oh,
they're such wonderfully kind, peaceful people.
Yes, they are.
At a street level, at a village level,
it produces the kindest people
of any religion in the world.
Even more than Hinduism or Buddhism.
And there's hardly any Islamic terrorists,
and a lot of them are misunderstood by the West,
and all of it is in response to the oppression
of Judaism and Christianity,
and the political states that came out of them.
But Islam is a wonderful place.
And once a year, on a lunar calendar,
Islams have a lunar calendar,
so it's never at the same time each year,
it sort of precesses back in time,
there is this enormous festival,
where about now three and a half million people come
to this place called Mecca
to be near this box, this black box,
it's fabric covered by the way,
called the kaba, meaning cube in Arabic,
and then they do this ritual four day walk
to the plane of Nina and mount Arathot and
these different places
and they do these rituals, these actions,
that Mohammad did in catch this.
Even the Islamic scholars will admit,
95% of a Hajj, is preislamic ritual.
They will admit it.
It actually is, and where the kaba is
was not only, people say, well it was the intersection,
Mecca was the intersection of two pilgrimage routes,
I mean two trade routes.
Yeah, why is trade coming there?
Because there were people there.
Why were people there?
Because they found a power place.
And then a few people settled,
and it's a few more and a few more,
and a few more, and a collection of families
turns into a small village and a large town
and then people are gonna supply it
with material goods and so trade routes developed,
but Mecca was not, there's no evidence of military,
political, or economic activity in antiquity,
it's a holy place that attracts people
by its spiritual magnetism.
And so when you go to Mecca and there's three and a half
million people doing the same thing,
oh, it's magnificent.
Then you're adding in, also,
the geometry of the structures
and you're also adding in the intention of the people
so could you just wanna talk for a moment
about what it's like to be at Hajj
and Mecca with this power of intention,
besides just your big side ah.
Well, one of the things is,
it's so wonderful being in a place
and you'll see,
people say oh I don't like the Islamic people
and I go, what do you mean,
Japanese or Alaskans or Canadians
or Americans, or Swiss or Dutch,
or Bolivians?
What do you mean you don't like Islamic people?
'Cause it's the most spread out religion in the world,
they're everywhere.
So to say I don't like Islamic people,
is to me an indication of one thing.
Your stupidity and geopolitical ignorance.
There's no such thing as Islamic people
as a separate group, okay.
So the Islamic people you meet
from all these different countries,
everybody's so happy and wonderful.
Nobody speaks the same language.
They speak, if there's 100 countries,
it's 100 different languages.
Arabic is just the language of the Koran.
And some of them say some of the things
in Koran but a lot of them say it in Swahili or Dutch
or Spanish, whatever language they're in.
That's real stupid, everybody there's this connection.
So that's beautiful.
But then when you get so many people,
in the same place,
ah, the charging of the energy,
like, twice I've been to the largest pilgrimage festival
in the world which is in Allahabad in India
called the Kumbh Mela,
and you get, once I was there with 12 million
and once I was there with 17 million people.
The Hajj only gets three and a half
but it's in just a few days.
And they're packed into the one place.
Oh, gosh, I mean, the closest thing
most people could think of,
is if they were on a spring day at lunchtime
on avenue in America,
Avenue of the America's in New York.
A lot of people come out,
a lot of people come out,
that's what it's like and they're happy.
That's what the Hajj is like,
but a lot, lot, lot, lot, more people
and they're a lot happier.
It's beautiful.
Yeah, so celebratory.
We happened to be in Jerusalem during Hajj
and such warm, kind, generous people,
soft and you're right,
I'm a fan, just like you are.
So, okay, we've got that,
now what about some of the other
most profound and mystical places
where you've had personal experiences
around the planet.
We've kind of gotta move through this quickly
because we only have an hour together here.
Just pick your few favorites if you care to share.
Well, I like the practice of meditation.
And to me the practice of meditation
the techniques are just a quiet,
this down, a quiet the chatter in the mind down,
so you can perceive and receive other frequencies
other teachings.
Well, I like to go to the places
where those, there's a greater likelihood
that those frequencies, those teachings,
are gonna be sort of like a fountain, almost,
more available.
And so these sacred mountains,
and these places where different saints and sages
have achieved enlightenment,
I like to go to those places and just be.
Just sit there and just be.
And in some of those places I had these visionary
experiences that have given me some information,
some about the past,
some about the present,
and some about this interesting thing
called the next 10 years on the planet.
So I like those places.
Care to name a few?
Drop a few names there?
Well, I guess I could just go back in the,
sort of a really rough order.
Easter Island was a major one for me,
and a place called Izumo-taisha in Japan.
And what is uh--
Izumo-taisha is a Shinto shrine in Japan.
It is a wonderful story, it's written about on my website,
beautiful story about, or legend about that site.
But legends are so interesting to me.
Then coming over to Mexico,
oh, there's just so many
but a really important one,
really, really important one,
you don't hear much about this one.
In Yucatn called Labna,
L-A-B-N-A, Labna, L-A-B-N-A.
It's a Mayan site.
And in numerous of the stone rings
and prereformation pilgrimage cathedrals in Europe,
Mount Olympus in Greece is extremely important to me.
Oh gosh, the list is so long,
the list is so long.
If people go to, you know,
and what's amazing, what's really important
is not my favorite sites at all,
what's important and what I've done with this website
is I feel that the photographs I take have sort of
what I call the homeopathic essence of the site,
because of the way I compose the pictures,
because the choice of the colors,
because of the time of the day,
the time of the year and all of that,
in my own intentionality,
I've created a photograph that is in a sense
a magical picture bean,
so that when people are looking at it,
in a sense, they're there.
When you're listening to a concerto bait
by Beethoven, you're in a sense inside of his head.
You're with him.
When you're looking at a painting
by Monet, even if it's in Minneapolis Museum,
you're standing where Monet stood,
'cause he stood there when he painted it.
So when you're looking at one of my photographs,
you're there.
But if you feel something,
if you, and it's not oh, that's really pretty,
but people feel something,
and I say that's that place reaching out
across time and space to you,
drawing you to it.
So when people say, well,
where should I go?
I go well where do you wanna go?
They say what do you mean?
I say is there a certain region of the world
you've been attracted to?
And they go, yeah, I've always wanted
to go to Asia, or I've always wanted
to go to Latin America.
I say okay, let's open up the websites,
I'm gonna keep my mouth shut,
you look at the pictures from Latin America
and see which ones touch you.
Then go there.
That's the best thing.
That's perfect advice.
Yeah, I don't wanna say,
don't go here, go there,
I wanna say let your soul,
let psychology, let the relationship you have
with this living Earth,
lead you to the most important place
at this point in your life.
And Martin Gray doesn't know that.
Go to his website by clicking on the link below
to see his stunning photographs
and for background on the history
and lore of each of these sites,
you will not find a better resource.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(peaceful music)